I'd like to talk to you on the theme, do the math.
Yes, you heard right, do the math.
Now, math may not be your favorite subject,
but as we're going to see, someone has to do it.
Sometimes, doing the math is the only way we can make a timeline
or get interesting background information
that makes our Bible reading more enjoyable.
And you do want to make your Bible reading more enjoyable, don't you?
Of course you do.
Well, let's start with a number.
We might quickly skip over in our Bible reading.
Let's turn to Matthew chapter 19 and verse 28.
And let's see how a number can sometimes tell us more
than what's written on the page.
Matthew 19 and verse 28.
Jesus said to them, truly, I say to you in the recreation
when the son of man sits down on his glorious throne,
you who have followed me will sit on 12 thrones
judging the 12 tribes of Israel.
Did you see anything interesting there?
I'll give you a hint.
These words respoke near the end of Jesus' earthly ministry.
Does that give you a hint?
I'll give you another hint.
The number 12.
At this point, Jesus knew that only 11 of his apostles
were going to be faithful.
Yet, he said there would be 12 thrones in the kingdom,
not 11.
What did it mean?
It meant that Judas would have to be replaced as an apostle.
And sure enough, he was.
Well, that was easy, wasn't it?
There was no math involved.
It was just a number.
But let's see how doing the math can help us to answer
a few questions.
During family worship, one of the kids
asked whether Noah and Abraham knew each other.
How are you going to handle that?
Do you know?
You might just say the Bible doesn't say and leave it at that.
But you could figure it out if you did the math.
Now, here's what we know.
The flood occurred in 2370 BCE.
Now, that date is absolutely solid.
And if you'd like to figure it out for yourself,
you can look it up under chronology in the Insight book.
2370 BCE, that's the flood.
And Noah lived for 350 years after the flood.
So by subtracting 350 from 2370,
we learned that Noah died in 2020 BCE.
But remember the question.
The question is, did Noah and Abraham know each other?
Abraham answered the land of Canaan in 1943 BCE.
Now, once again, if you want to prove that to yourself,
look at Insight under chronology.
You'll find everything you need to prove it to yourself.
So 1943, Abraham, Abraham, in that case,
he enters the land of Canaan.
And he's 75 years old at the time.
So Abraham must have been born 75 years before 1943.
Add 75 to 1943.
And you'll find that Abraham was born in 2018 BCE.
So Noah died in 2020.
And Abraham was born two years later in 2018.
They never knew each other, but it was close.
Our publications have often said that Jonathan
was at least 30 years older than David.
But the Bible doesn't say that.
Your progressive Bible student, you know,
the one who makes you prove everything, he asks you about that.
Can you prove it?
Can you?
You can if you do the math.
King Saul ruled Israel for 40 years.
Then David became king.
The how old was David when he became king?
The Bible says he was 30 years old.
That means that when David was born,
Saul had already been ruling Israel for 10 years.
But when Saul became king,
Jonathan was a grown man.
He was probably already in the army.
You had to be at least 20 years old to be in the army.
So if Jonathan was at least 20 when Saul began to rule
and David was born 10 years after that,
what difference in age would there be between Jonathan and David?
About 30 years difference.
20 plus 10 equals 30.
Now the next one is a bit more complicated.
It's the last one.
And we can do this.
Inside on the scriptures says that Moses and Job
lived at the same time.
But the Bible doesn't say that.
How can we be so sure?
Once again, what do we do?
Do I hear it?
You're right.
We do the math.
Job's test must have occurred sometime after the death of Joseph.
We know that because at Job chapter 1,
Jehovah told Satan,
there is no one like Job on the earth.
No one.
Now if Joseph had still been alive,
Jehovah would have said,
there was no one like Joseph and Job on the earth.
And if the test had occurred earlier,
Jehovah would have said,
there was no one like Jacob and Job,
Isaac and Job, Abraham and Job.
And remember,
there were only two years between Noah and Abraham.
So we can conclude that the test of Job occurred
after the death of Joseph.
When did Joseph die?
The date is solid.
It's 1657 BCE.
How do we figure that?
If you don't like math,
trust me.
You don't want to know.
But inside and the Bible will give you
all the information you need to figure it out for yourself.
But let's keep it simple.
Let's go with 1657 BCE.
That's 144 years before Israel left Egypt
under the direction of Moses in 1513 BCE.
So Job's test must have occurred sometime
within that 144 year period.
Now this is a big hint.
144 years before Israel left Egypt.
Are you beginning to put it together?
Here is the clincher.
Job lived for 140 years after he passed the test.
So he was probably still alive in the land of us
when Israel left Egypt.
Conclusion,
Job and Moses definitely lived at the same time.
So what if we learn by doing the math?
Superficially, we might say,
well, we learned that Abraham was born two years after Noah
and we proved that Jonathan was at least 30 years older than David
and that Moses and Job definitely lived at the same time.
Superficially, we got the answers to those questions, yes.
But the fact is, probably none of those questions
ever kept you up at night.
There's a broader picture here.
What we'd like you to take away
is the fact that sometimes a number is more than just a number.
It can provide information that we couldn't get any other way.
And if we can understand that,
this discussion will have been well worth having.
So when you see a number in the Bible,
don't run the other way.
Embrace it.
Stop and think about it.
You may be glad you did.